Alternative docs (#52)
fox-it/dissect-docs: docs/source/tutorial.rst

Tutorial
--------

For this tutorial we are going to use a well known case file from `NIST <https://cfreds.nist.gov/all/NIST/HackingCase>`_.

> In this tutorial we assume Linux is used, on other operating systems most steps are the same but details may differ.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In this tutorial we use a Linux operating system. Most steps will be same if you perform this tutorial on other operating systems but some details may be different.
```

Author: I don't really see the improvement here, except that it's more verbose?

First of all, we install Python and create a venv:

.. code-block:: console

    $ python3 -m venv dissect

Now activate the virtual environment to get some work done:

.. code-block:: console

>     $ source dissect/bin/activate

Reviewer: You never install dissect using pip.

Reviewer: To be completely honest, writing these steps out seems a bit overkill. You can in my opinion redirect them to the "install" page of dissect. This page also describes the requirements/prerequisites of dissect and this page doesn't.

Author: > You never install dissect using pip.

This is done on the install page, which comes before the tutorial.

Author: > To be completely honest, writing these steps out seems a bit overkill. You can in my opinion redirect them to the "install" page of dissect. The install page also describes the requirements/prerequisites of dissect and this page doesn't.

Not everyone knows how to use Python. Redirecting to other sources might turn people away. Dissect is not just about Python, it's an IR tool. We might attract an audience that has a different skill set and appreciates the extra steps.

    

Let's download the case files. At the time of writing they are hosted at nist.gov.
On Linux:

.. code-block:: console

    $ for i in {1..8}; do curl https://cfreds-archive.nist.gov/images/hacking-dd/SCHARDT.00$i -o SCHARDT.00$i; done
    
.. note ::

    You can also download them manually of course.
    
Now, we are going to do some basic operations on this image. If you like, you can merge them together first,
although this is not strictly necessary:

.. code-block:: console

>     $ for i in `ls SCHARDT.00*`; do cat $i >> SCHARDT.img; done

Reviewer: This is in my opinion only making things quite difficult for an unexperienced forensic investigator. For someone experienced with bash this is quite logical, however I might guess most people will just plainly copy paste the command. This is an Dissect tutorial, not a bash one-liner showcase.

Author: People tend to just copy-paste these lines. They don't have to understand it fully. This is done in many tutorials to help inexperienced users to get to a workable begin state.

Author: ok

To get a brief summary of the forensic image, we use :doc:`target-info <tools/target-info>` like this:

.. code-block:: console

    $ target-info SCHARDT.img

The result will be something like this:

.. code-block:: console

    Disks
    - <Disk type="RawContainer" size="4871301120">

    Volumes
    - <Volume name="part_00007e00" size="4869333504" fs="NtfsFilesystem">

    Hostname       : N-1A9ODN6ZXK4LQ
    Domain         : None
    Ips            : 192.168.1.111
    Os family      : windows
    Os version     : Microsoft Windows XP (NT 5.1) 2600
    Architecture   : x86_32-win32
    Language       : 
    Timezone       : America/Chicago
    Install date   : 2004-08-19 22:48:27+00:00
    Last activity  : 2004-08-27 15:46:33.820240+00:00

> To get the list of user accounts on this machine we use :doc:`target-query <target-query>`.

Reviewer: I would suggest to split this up. Explain you can use target-query with the users plugin. Display target-query img.img -f users and give output. Then explain you can combine it with rdump. Display target-query | rdump command with output.

This approach will make it way easier for a reader to follow.

Author: The frontpage already shows `-f users `. There is some synergy between the pages of the manual to let the reader flow more naturally from one subject into another. I guess this gets lost in github.

Another tool at our disposal is :doc:`rdump <rdump>`. By default target-query gives us records,
to process, filter and format results we can feed them to rdump, here we only select the name of the user:

.. code-block:: console

    $ target-query SCHARDT.img -f users | rdump -F name -C

The output is:

.. code-block:: console

    name
    systemprofile
    LocalService
    NetworkService
    Mr. Evil

To see what else we can query in this image, use the ``-l`` option:

.. code-block:: console

>     $ target-query SCHARDT.img -l -q

Reviewer: This should maybe be explained before executing the users plugin? First list all and then execute one?

Author: The approach of this documentation style is to first show a practical use, then dive into more theoretical issues. So, I recommend to first show how you do something with a tool, then how to query the tool what more you can do with the same tool.

.. note ::

    We also add ``-q`` to suppress warnings from plugins telling us they
    are not compatible with this forensic image.

You now see a list of plugins that you can use with the ``-f`` option.
Try a couple of them.

If we want to query for suspicious programs that might have been installed
on this machine we use the following command to generate a spreadsheet with

> all binary files:

Author: Ok, rewritten.

.. code-block:: console

    $ target-query SCHARDT.img -f walkfs | rdump -s "r.path.suffix=='.exe'" -F path,ctime,mtime,size -C > db.csv

Here we use the ``-s`` option for rdump to filter on a particular file extension.

> We use a *python expression* here (you can use any Python expression you like).

Reviewer: You explain the -s parameter and not the -F one? Why specify one and not both?

Tutorial
--------

For this tutorial we are going to use a well known case file from `NIST <https://cfreds.nist.gov/all/NIST/HackingCase>`_.
In this tutorial we assume Linux is used, on other operating systems most steps are the same but details may differ.
First of all, we install Python and create a venv:

.. code-block:: console

    $ python3 -m venv dissect

.. note ::

    Learn how to :doc:`install Dissect </install>`

Now activate the virtual environment to get some work done:

.. code-block:: console

    $ source dissect/bin/activate
    

Let's download the case files. At the time of writing they are hosted at nist.gov.
On Linux:

.. code-block:: console

    $ for i in {1..8}; do curl https://cfreds-archive.nist.gov/images/hacking-dd/SCHARDT.00$i -o SCHARDT.00$i; done
    
.. note ::

>     You can also download them manually of course.

Author: agreed

.. code-block:: console

    $ target-query SCHARDT.img -f walkfs | rdump -s "r.path.suffix=='.exe'" -F path,ctime,mtime,size
    
This reduces the number characters per line significantly.
However due to the record representation, it is still hard to read
(hence no output example is shown)
To make it even more readable, we add the
``-C`` option to convert it to a comma separated format:

.. code-block:: console

    $ target-query SCHARDT.img -f walkfs | rdump -s "r.path.suffix=='.exe'" -F path,ctime,mtime,size -C
    
    \sysvol\winfo.exe,2004-08-19 22:25:09.860123+00:00,2004-08-19 23:05:15.852375+00:00,41.6 KB
    \sysvol\pwdump.exe,2004-08-19 22:25:09.860123+00:00,2004-08-19 23:05:15.852375+00:00,41.6 KB
    \sysvol\...\LookAtLan.exe,2004-08-19 22:25:09.860123+00:00,2004-08-19 23:05:15.852375+00:00,41.6 KB

This already looks much more compact and searchable. Finally, we can put the resulting table
in a spreadsheet for further investigation. We accomplish this by simply adding ``> db.csv``

.. code-block:: console

    $ target-query SCHARDT.img -f walkfs | rdump -s "r.path.suffix=='.exe'" -F path,ctime,mtime,size -C > db.csv

> You can now open the ``db.csv`` file in your favourite spreadsheet program and

Author: The phrase with "favourite" is more common in developer cycles.
